content/posts/beta-test-songs.mdx, before:

---
title: BetaTestSongs.com
description: A fullstack web app used for EDM producers to get feedback on their songs.
date: "2023-07-15"
---

## What is [BetaTestSongs.com](https://BetaTestSongs.com)

BetaTestSongs.com is for EDM producers. It's a tool to help solve the problem of getting unbiased feedback for WIP (work in progress) songs.
It does this by creating a marketplace where producers can anonymously submit and review songs.

You can check out the code [here](https://github.com/ericvtheg/beta-test-songs).

### Objective

Create something with as little work as possible that still helps people (i.e. build an MVP).

Even with this goal, throughout the course of this project I caught myself over engineering. I will go more into this later in the article.

## Core Functionality

### Domain Concepts

Song: a song that an artist wants feedback for.

Review: feedback given to a song.

Review Queue: a FIFO queue of songs waiting to be reviewed.

Review Started: a user has started a review and now "owns" that song for an hour. If the review is not completed it goes back to the review queue with top priority.

Review Finished: feedback has been submitted.

### Access Patterns

Users can:

- submit a link to a song
- start a review, which will fetch the oldest song in the review queue
- submit a review, which will trigger a notification email to the user that requested the review
- see a submitted review for a song

## Architecture

The web app is hosted with AWS using the following services: s3, CloudFront, ECS, EC2, ECR, RDS, & SES.

Here is a high level diagram of the cloud infrastructure that makes up BetaTestSongs.com.

<div
  style={{
    width: "660px",
    height: "340px",
    margin: "10px",
    position: "relative",
  }}
>
  <iframe
    allowfullscreen
    frameborder="0"
    style={{ width: "660px", height: "340px", "pointer-events": "none" }}
    src="https://lucid.app/documents/embedded/53942ca1-d74d-4190-a7e0-5b6f009ea749"
    id="TdCcGj3-CkVz"
  ></iframe>
</div>

Naturally as a web app, there are two distinct parts: the backend and frontend.

### Frontend Tech

- Vite
- React
- Tailwind CSS

### Backend Tech

- Containers
- NestJS
- Postgres
- Terraform
- Mixpanel (analytics)

### The Database

#### Why SQL?

The primary reason I opted for SQL was for extendability. Features such as multiple reviews per song and selecting a random song would work better in a relational database.

#### Schema

The schema is pretty straight forward and handles our access patterns well.

![](/betatestsongs_schema.png)

## Things That Reduced Time and Development Effort

- Used [a template](https://tailwindui.com/components/marketing/sections/heroes) and [React components](https://tailwindui.com/components/application-ui/overlays/modals) from Tailwind CSS.
  - Using a template and ready made React components helps so much with not messing around with design and responsiveness.
- Opted out of user authentication.
  - By avoiding authentication I'm not only getting rid of an extra hurdle for users, I'm also saving myself from the complexity that comes with it.
- Deployed directly from my machine (as opposed to using GitHub Actions).
  - This was the first time I did this. Instead of building out Github Actions and managing secrets, I just ran deployments directly from my machine.
- Opted to use links instead of files.
  - Instead of managing file uploads, storage, and fetching, users just submitted [SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com) links to their songs.

## Wins

There were a few solved challenges that are useful and applicable to other projects.

Such as:

- Prisma migrations for an RDS instance in a private subnet
- Doing 0 downtime deploys with a single (free) t3.micro EC2 instance
- Prevented users from viewing their own song submissions despite there being no login / accounts
- Using Mixpanel to track page landings and first time visits

## Mistakes

Recall that my primary goal with this project was to help users.

## Over Engineering

The mistake that stood out was the one I was originally trying to avoid: over engineering.
I caught myself spending time setting up cloudwatch alerts to enable scaling the application layer.
I shouldn't have bothered with this until I actually needed it (i.e. when I had users).
I also spent too much time setting up my infrastructure and deployments using IaC when I didn't need to.

All of this engineering effort is great when there is users, but if there is none it's a waste.

What I should have been focused on is creating a bare bones PoC (Proof of Concept). Something just good enough that I can show potential users and get feedback to see if I'm even solving a problem.

## Technical Mistakes

I accidentally deployed a version of my site that had an api route hardcoded to localhost. In other words I had localhost hardcoded in the actual webpage itself.
When I visited the site through my browser Google _really_ did not like this. It blacklisted my site and warned users not to visit.
I had to submit a request for them to review that the site is now safe. This was a really costly mistake and one I will not make again — use relative paths.

## Takeaways

1. Establish Product Market Fit above all else. If I want users, then users need to want the product.
2. Just use Vercel. It's all you need for spinning up a web app quickly.
   - It's so easy to get up and running with a web app that has good performance, decent extendability, automated deploys, etc.
   - The best part, it even comes with a backend where you can store secrets and do any necessary server application logic.

Commit message:

now linking to prisma migrate blog post in other blog post

content/posts/beta-test-songs.mdx, after:

---
title: BetaTestSongs.com
description: A fullstack web app used for EDM producers to get feedback on their songs.
date: "2023-07-15"
---

## What is [BetaTestSongs.com](https://BetaTestSongs.com)

BetaTestSongs.com is for EDM producers. It's a tool to help solve the problem of getting unbiased feedback for WIP (work in progress) songs.
It does this by creating a marketplace where producers can anonymously submit and review songs.

You can check out the code [here](https://github.com/ericvtheg/beta-test-songs).

### Objective

Create something with as little work as possible that still helps people (i.e. build an MVP).

Even with this goal, throughout the course of this project I caught myself over engineering. I will go more into this later in the article.

## Core Functionality

### Domain Concepts

Song: a song that an artist wants feedback for.

Review: feedback given to a song.

Review Queue: a FIFO queue of songs waiting to be reviewed.

Review Started: a user has started a review and now "owns" that song for an hour. If the review is not completed it goes back to the review queue with top priority.

Review Finished: feedback has been submitted.

### Access Patterns

Users can:

- submit a link to a song
- start a review, which will fetch the oldest song in the review queue
- submit a review, which will trigger a notification email to the user that requested the review
- see a submitted review for a song

## Architecture

The web app is hosted with AWS using the following services: s3, CloudFront, ECS, EC2, ECR, RDS, & SES.

Here is a high level diagram of the cloud infrastructure that makes up BetaTestSongs.com.

<div
  style={{
    width: "660px",
    height: "340px",
    margin: "10px",
    position: "relative",
  }}
>
  <iframe
    allowfullscreen
    frameborder="0"
    style={{ width: "660px", height: "340px", "pointer-events": "none" }}
    src="https://lucid.app/documents/embedded/53942ca1-d74d-4190-a7e0-5b6f009ea749"
    id="TdCcGj3-CkVz"
  ></iframe>
</div>

Naturally as a web app, there are two distinct parts: the backend and frontend.

### Frontend Tech

- Vite
- React
- Tailwind CSS

### Backend Tech

- Containers
- NestJS
- Postgres
- Terraform
- Mixpanel (analytics)

### The Database

#### Why SQL?

The primary reason I opted for SQL was for extendability. Features such as multiple reviews per song and selecting a random song would work better in a relational database.

#### Schema

The schema is pretty straight forward and handles our access patterns well.

![](/betatestsongs_schema.png)

## Things That Reduced Time and Development Effort

- Used [a template](https://tailwindui.com/components/marketing/sections/heroes) and [React components](https://tailwindui.com/components/application-ui/overlays/modals) from Tailwind CSS.
  - Using a template and ready made React components helps so much with not messing around with design and responsiveness.
- Opted out of user authentication.
  - By avoiding authentication I'm not only getting rid of an extra hurdle for users, I'm also saving myself from the complexity that comes with it.
- Deployed directly from my machine (as opposed to using GitHub Actions).
  - This was the first time I did this. Instead of building out Github Actions and managing secrets, I just ran deployments directly from my machine.
- Opted to use links instead of files.
  - Instead of managing file uploads, storage, and fetching, users just submitted [SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com) links to their songs.

## Wins

There were a few solved challenges that are useful and applicable to other projects.

Such as:

- Prisma migrations for an RDS instance in a private subnet (Check out my post about it [here](/posts/prisma-migrations-private-subnet))
- Doing 0 downtime deploys with a single (free) t3.micro EC2 instance
- Prevented users from viewing their own song submissions despite there being no login / accounts
- Using Mixpanel to track page landings and first time visits

## Mistakes

Recall that my primary goal with this project was to help users.

## Over Engineering

The mistake that stood out was the one I was originally trying to avoid: over engineering.
I caught myself spending time setting up cloudwatch alerts to enable scaling the application layer.
I shouldn't have bothered with this until I actually needed it (i.e. when I had users).
I also spent too much time setting up my infrastructure and deployments using IaC when I didn't need to.

All of this engineering effort is great when there is users, but if there is none it's a waste.

What I should have been focused on is creating a bare bones PoC (Proof of Concept). Something just good enough that I can show potential users and get feedback to see if I'm even solving a problem.

## Technical Mistakes

I accidentally deployed a version of my site that had an api route hardcoded to localhost. In other words I had localhost hardcoded in the actual webpage itself.
When I visited the site through my browser Google _really_ did not like this. It blacklisted my site and warned users not to visit.
I had to submit a request for them to review that the site is now safe. This was a really costly mistake and one I will not make again — use relative paths.

## Takeaways

1. Establish Product Market Fit above all else. If I want users, then users need to want the product.
2. Just use Vercel. It's all you need for spinning up a web app quickly.
   - It's so easy to get up and running with a web app that has good performance, decent extendability, automated deploys, etc.
   - The best part, it even comes with a backend where you can store secrets and do any necessary server application logic.
